---
layout: thesis-post
title:  Preface
category: thesis
permalink: /data-for-surfs-sake/preface
---

## Acknowledgements

Firstly I would like to thank Rhazes Spell, my initial supervisor, for giving me that push to pursue an area that I am passionate about. Secondly, my supervisor Kah Chan, for accepting that I was going to stick to with this path, and subtly directing me to create something acceptable in research standards.

I would also like to thank, my family for their support throughout this process, my flatmates for finding ways to distract from this project, and my classmates, for slowly going crazy with me so we all looked a little less insane.

Finally, I would like to thank everyone who asked what I was doing for my thesis. The constant badgering allowed me to iterate over thousands of answers to that question and narrow it down to one sentence: I am communicating what I know about surfing through the visualisation of data generated by surfers around the world.

## Abstract

Over the last two years action sports trackers have emerged for those seeking thrills in risk-taking sports (Mitchell, 2014). The data generated by these trackers is creating digitised representations of communities participating in action sports such as surfing. The surfing database comprises of activity all over the globe, and due to its size and complexity it can be categorised as big data. Understanding this complex database requires specific data visualisation methods which visually map relationships and patterns. This research asked: can an interactive data visualisation illustrate hierarchical, nomadic, and experiential aspects of the surfing subculture? 

This thesis is based on ethnographic research which focuses on exploring qualitative visualisations of the quantitative databases generated by action sports trackers for surfing. The research focused on the design of data visualisations which explored contemporary methods and principles of data visualisation and their applicability to communicate aspects of the surfing subculture. This manifested in the design of an interactive web application, Gone Surfing, which focused on global, local, and personal views which communicate Stranger’s (2011) substructure model of the surfing subculture.

The hierarchical, nomadic, and experiential aspects of the surfing subculture are only known from long term immersion in the subculture itself. This design made these aspects explicit through the visualisation of the database. For example, pilgrimage to revered surfing locations and hierarchy within local communities, and a surfer’s relationship with the waves are forms of implicit knowledge which were made explicit. The final creative output, Gone Surfing, visualises these aspects in an interactive web application consisting of global, local, and personal views to each communicate an aspect effectively. The interactive visualisation allows non-surfers to explore the subculture while enhancing a surfer’s understanding of their position within the surfing nation.

## Glossary

**beach break** - a wave that breaks on sandbars just offshore.

**point break** - wave that wraps around and breaks along a rocky point.

**surf** - to ride waves on a surfboard

**surf spot** - a specific location where a wave breaks, one beach usually contains more than one break.

**surf session** - any time spent surfing

**turn** - a manoeuvre performed on the face of the wave while riding the wave

