---
layout: thesis-post
title:  Conclusion
category: thesis
permalink: /data-for-surfs-sake/conclusion
---

## Conclusion

This project aimed to create a data visualisation of the data generated with surfing, and within this visualisation communicate relationships and experiences found within the surfing community. The research approached this aim using typical visual design methods used in the visualisation of information such as Computation Information Design (Fry, 2006) and Complex Network Visualisation (Lima, 2011). 

This thesis asked: can an interactive data visualisation illustrate hierarchical, nomadic, and experiential aspects of the surfing subculture? In response to this question, this research identified the substructure within surfing defined by Stranger (2011) and generated a design criteria, it then developed this criteria in response to a iterative design process to define a brief. Finally, the design process responded to this brief by creating a web based visualisation that allows the viewing and exploration of the database. This research process successfully extracted implicit knowledge of hierarchy within tribes of surfers, the pilgrimage of a surfer, a surfer’s interaction with the waves, and made these aspects explicit through data visualisation and interaction.

The effectiveness of the final design was based on a strong understanding of the database in the surfing context. With such a multivariate database it was important that a criteria was developed before the design stages so that the relationships visualised throughout the research could be easily identified. This criteria was influenced by Stranger’s (2011) model of surface and substructure within the surfing subculture, specifically the substructure. The criteria formed around three cultural aspects; the formation of neo-tribes and hierarchy within these tribes, a surfer’s pilgrimage in search of the perfect wave, and the surfer’s personal understanding of the waves. These criteria were developed into a brief by analysing the data generated by surfers using data visualisation ‘sketches’. This experimentation process analysed the data by plotting geo-locations, visualising movements of surfers between locations and animating movements of the surfer while on a wave. Thus, by understanding the context of the data a well informed design brief could be established for the final design.

The hierarchy of information in the visualisation was important in communicating different levels of information and relationships to different viewers. Each view within the application, global, local, and personal, contained a hierarchy of information to best communicate the cultural aspects. These consisted of statistics such as location, swell size, time, and so on. These views, allow for the exploration of the database through different levels of detail to gain a general understanding of the surfing nation quickly and a detailed understanding of the hierarchies, pilgrimages, and experiences from further interaction.

This research found that designing a data visualisation of the surfing subculture involves a iterative approach where the designer is able to respond to, and develop, a criteria based on research into that cultural group. Engaging in the context of the database, in this instance the surfing subculture, allows for a clear hierarchy of information that promotes different levels of engagement, interaction, and understanding. The process of analysing the visual design in response to cultural cues authenticates this digitised representation of the surfing subculture.


